

----- BEGIN ARTIFACT A2 (m1_A2.txt) -----

Model Answer:
Alternative energy production, such as using wind, solar, or hydroelectric power, reduces the burning of fossil fuels like coal and oil. This means less carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases are released into the atmosphere, which helps slow down global warming.

Planting trees also helps because trees absorb carbon dioxide during photosynthesis, removing it from the air and storing it as carbon in their biomass. This reduces the overall concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, helping to reduce the rate of climate change.

----- END ARTIFACT A2 -----


----- BEGIN ARTIFACT A1 (m1_A1.txt) -----

MARK SCHEME – GCSE GEOGRAPHY – 8035/1 – JUNE 2021 

•  Understanding of processes causing volcanic activity at destructive margins. 
Two plates move towards each other.  The denser plate sinks below the 
lighter, less dense plate and melts in the subduction zone.  Hot magma rises 
up through the overlying mantle and lithosphere, and some can eventually 
erupt out at the surface producing volcanoes. 

•  Credit the idea that magma becomes increasingly viscous or sticky as it 

rises to the surface, producing composite volcanoes which are steep sided 
and have violent eruptions.  

•  Understanding of earthquakes at destructive margins.  As the two plates 
converge, pressure builds up.  The rocks eventually fracture causing an 
earthquake.  Most happen at shallow depths below the surface where the 
plates collide. They also occur at greater depth, in the lower part of the 
subduction zone.  

•  Application of knowledge and understanding to the map.  The Nazca Plate is 
subducted beneath the South American Plate.  Expect recognition that this 
plate boundary is destructive and that the denser ocean crust is subducted.  

AO2 – 2 marks 
AO3 – 2 marks 

01 

7 

State two ways that planning might help to reduce the damaging effects 
of an earthquake or a volcanic eruption. 

2 

Prepare emergency aid and distribution (1).  Practise earthquake/volcano 
drills. (1)  Plan evacuation routes (1).  Stockpile blankets, clean water and food 
(1).  Educate people so they know what to do if an earthquake or volcano 
happens (1).  Prepare hazard maps to show areas most at risk of damage (1). 

2 separate ways are required. 

AO1 – 2 marks 

01 

8  Using Figure 3, which one of the following statements is true? 

1 

One mark for correct answer: 

C. High pressure occurs where the air is sinking. 

No credit if two or more answers are circled.  

AO4 – 1 mark  

9 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MARK SCHEME – GCSE GEOGRAPHY – 8035/1 – JUNE 2021 

01 

9  Using Figure 3, describe the link between air pressure and surface winds. 

2 

Eg Winds blow from high pressure areas to low pressure areas (1).  Eg The 
trade winds blow from 30 degrees N and S towards the Equator (d) (1). 
Winds converge in areas of low pressure (1) eg the Polar easterlies meet the 
westerlies at 60 degrees S (d) (1). 
Sinking air causes high pressure (1) which leads to winds moving 
away/diverging (d) (1). 

AO4 – 2 marks 

01 

10  Suggest why areas close to the Equator usually have high rainfall.  

2 

Use Figure 3 and your own understanding. 

Air is heated by the sun / air rises rapidly along the Equator (1). The air cools 
and condensation occurs (d) (1). This leads to heavy showers and frequent 
(convectional) thunderstorms. (d) (1) 

AO3 – 2 marks 

01 

11  To what extent is climate change the result of human actions?  

9 

Use Figure 4 and your own understanding. 

Level 

Marks   Description 

3 (Detailed) 

7–9  AO1 Demonstrates detailed knowledge of the factors 

which affect climate change. 

AO2 Shows thorough geographical understanding of 
places, environments and processes.  

AO3 Demonstrates thorough application of 
knowledge and understanding in evaluating the 
importance of human and physical factors to climate 
change. 

2 (Clear) 

4–6  AO1 Demonstrates clear knowledge of the factors 

which affect climate change. 

AO2 Shows some geographical understanding of 
places, environments and processes.  

AO3 Demonstrates reasonable application of 
knowledge and understanding in evaluating the 
importance of human and physical factors to climate 
change.    

1 (Basic) 

1–3  AO1 Demonstrates limited knowledge of the factors 

which affect climate change. 

AO2 Shows slight geographical understanding of 
places, environments and processes.    

AO3 Demonstrates limited application of knowledge 
and understanding in evaluating the importance of 
human factors to climate change. 

0 

No relevant content. 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


----- END ARTIFACT A1 -----
